# VPI and DPI
Although SystemVerilog offers a set of powerful language primitives to satisfy normal usages, in many cases people wish to opt for more direct control over the simulation, retrospection on the design hierarchy at runtime, or even have finer granularity of assertion. As a result, in 2005 IEEE standardize the interface between the simulator and the C programming interface and name it Verilog Procedural Interface (VPI), originally known as PLI 2.0. VPI allows C functions to be invoked in behavioral RTL code and provides a set of events to which C code can register callback. Notice that VPI is part of Verilog standard and by virtually inheriting Verilog, SystemVerilog also supports VPI.

Although a powerful tool to use, VPI has couple limitations and SystemVerilog introduces Direct Programming INterface (DPI), which allows foreign languages such as C and C++ to directly interface with the simulator. Unlike VPI, DPI ensures compatibility and efficiency by providing an two separated layers (SystemVerilog layer and foreign language layer). We will discuss the similarity and differences in this chapter.


## Verilog Procedural Interface
VPI offers a set of C functions that can be used to interact with the simulator:

1. Introspect the entire design hierarchy
2. Set callbacks to a set of simulation events such as when the simulation starts or when a signal value changes
3. Wrap a C function as system task called by test bench code.

In this chapter we will mainly focus on the first two features of VPI, since the last feature can be done in DPI most of the time.


### Design Introspection


### Callbacks


## Direct Programming Interface

